All right,
we can also get computed styles.
I'm gonna cover this a little bit later.
But CSS is kind of an interesting language
because it doesn't have a compile time or
it doesn't have errors in the same
way that maybe JavaScript does.
So for example, if we wrote some CSS
that was, class of foo background red,
and then right afterwards we wrote,
class of foo background blue.
How is CSS supposed to deal with that,
right?
We've got this kind of conflict.
In JavaScript we throw an error or
it would just assign the latest
one that's been given, right?
If you did like var foo
equals red foo equals blue.
It would just set it and
it's just a constant with error.
But CSS is a little bit weird.
And it's also weird because,
the CSS when you write it isn't aware of
the structure of the DOM,
what it will be when it actually renders.
So that sounds complicated, but
I don't think it really is.
So let's say we write CSS where we write,
all divs are blue and
anything with the class of foo is red.
That seems like pretty straightforward,
right?
Divs are blue things with foo are rad.
But then let's say we make
a div with the class of foo.
Now all of a sudden CSS has a problem,
right?
Because you've told it now
two different things apply.
And so what it does is it follows
these rules called CSS specificity,
and it's basically a big giant fight,
[LAUGH] right?
Where they all the selectors that
exist on a given element fight.
And so
Estelle has this really great website,
which I've linked to here
called CSS Specifishity.
And it's a little comic which kind of
helps you understand how these CSS rules
play out.
And so you can see each type
of selector in the top left,
a cute drawing in the middle, and
then it's kinda score down here.
So you can see the weakest selector
of all is the star, the asterisk, and
that will apply to everything universally.
So sometimes you'll see like asterisk,
margin 0, padding 0 on a website.
So just kind of by default,
stuff doesn't have padding.
And then we get into an element selector,
and
then we get into a double element
selector, then more and more selectors.
So if you have a ul with
an li with a span in there,
if you do span, blue, li span,
red ul li span yellow,
it'll be yellow cuz
that's the most specific.
Because it's got three in there.
Then it goes into classes,
then it goes into an asterisk with a class
anyway kind of follows the whole way up.
But what's kind of important to know is
that element selectors are the weakest
type of selector besides the asterisks.
And then it classes are also pretty weak.
And then as you get up
IDs are pretty strong.
And then inline styles like in your HTML
so if you do div style equals background
blue is really strong and the only thing
stronger than that is an important tag.
Which we all try to keep
probably out of our sights, but
they find their way in anyway.
But that's just like,
this isn't a CSS class.
But that's a high level
view which is needed for
this next section because CSS has a really
hard job where you author it, and
it runs having no idea what
DOM what HTML is gonna run on.
And so it needs these are rules for
when there's conflicting information.
So computed styles back to where
I was before, is really cool.
So you can click on an element
like let's go find this h2 here.
And then instead of
being on the styles tab,
which is probably the one we spend most
of our time on, you can click computed.
And what computed is going to give you
is a list of like okay after the fight
happens, [LAUGH] I don't know how
else to phrase it besides the fight.
But after a CSS specificity
rules are all applied,
these are the things that won, right?
These are the things, so
if you had for an example,
we can take the h2, and we can say okay,
h2s are all blue, right?
And so that h2 turns blue.
And then, but
it's got an idea of quick edits, right?
So we go ahead and we make a new selector
and we do quick edits and we do okay.
Well, quick edits,
those are all red, right?
And so as we'd expect,
it turns red because an ID is
stronger than an element, right?
But when you work on big apps with
a lot of teams all contributing stuff,
it's never quite this simple.
It's like two selectors, right?
It's like everybody's bringing
selectors to the table.
So you're like every component
has its own stuff and
different teams write different stuff.
And, oftentimes people come up with these
solutions like scoped styles or BEM or
all these different things to try to deal
with this cuz it gets really difficult.
When I work at Twitter
which is a massive web app,
I can't tell you how many times I would
get a ticket like extra border appearing
on tweets when you're logged out and
you are viewing this and reply.
And I'm looking at CSS to try and
find specific role, it's like ul li so
the idea of tweets and
class of active tweet, all that stuff.
Really confusing.
So computed styles can be really great
because you can go to computed styles,
you can try to find the thing you are
looking for like, why is it red, right?
You can find that color is red,
that's fine.
Then you can click this little caret here,
and it'll say, look, here's a list of all
the things that change the color, and
here's the one that won out, right?
And so if you click on this
little arrow next to the one,
it'll take you back into the styles tab,
right?
So we've gone from computed back in the
styles, and it'll show you where that is.
So computed is really cool.
It also shows you the full box model.
Again, this is not like an HTML or
CSS class, but
I assume a lot of people have heard the
term box model before, the HTML box model.
And so it's basically it's like you
have a thing and it has a size, but
then it has padding potentially,
then it has border potentially,
then it has margin potentially.
This is a really great way of
visualizing it for any element.
So you can see the element
has a size 1200 by 38.
It has no padding, no border and a margin
of 33 on the top and 8 on the bottom.
This is gonna be really cool too when
you're just trying to visualize how
stuff's gonna render.
Yeah, and so this is a great tool,
especially for
big apps where you're trying to figure
out why something is the way it is.
You can just go ahead and refresh, you can
be like why is this black? Hover on it.
See there's only one rule,
click on the arrow and
it will take me right to the actual
line that sets the color to black.